---
title: "Nine upcoming events to help you increase your data skills with stream processing"
date: 2023-07-12
authors: [theo-england]
slug: 2022-data-events-develop-career
description: >
  Looking to level up your data career? Whether you’re a developer, data engineer, data scientist or someone else who happens to work with data, these upcoming events offer you the opportunity to learn new skills and meet new people.
categories:
  - industry-insights
---

# Nine upcoming events to help you increase your data skills with stream processing

Looking to level up your data career? Whether you’re a developer, data engineer, data scientist or someone else who happens to work with data, these upcoming events offer you the opportunity to learn new skills and meet new people.

<!-- more -->

## Stop your video calls and learn about stream processing in real life for a
few days

Traditional data jobs are shifting and more people than ever work with data on
a daily basis. Developers to marketers are increasingly required to take on
tasks traditionally allocated to data engineers and scientists. All this
fluctuation means people need to develop new types of data skills. We have you
covered.

Here are nine upcoming events associated with stream processing, where you can
learn how to apply a new technology or meet new people that can help you
navigate the wide world of data.  

## 1\. Data Council (March 23–24, Austin TX)

[Data Council](https://www.datacouncil.ai/austin) offers a “100% no bullsh*t
guarantee” event about data science, engineering and analytics. You’ll want to
join for the easy networking and the abundance of speakers across six learning
tracks. There’s something for everyone here.

You’ll see presentations like this one by Andreas Markmann from Capital One.
He describes the key design challenges data engineering teams encounter when
applying stream processing.  

## 2\. Open Data Science Conference (April 19–21, Boston)

The [ODS conference](https://odsc.com/boston/) caters to people looking to
connect with the data science community. The next edition of this global
conference will happen in Boston this April with a list of keynotes that
include Hilary Mason, co-founder of Hidden Door and former data scientist at
Accel Partners, and Dr. Hari Bhaskar, director of data science and AI platform
at Oracle. Expect a focus on networking with over 1700 companies in
attendance. If you’re looking to assess various tools and data communities,
this conference is for you.  

## 3\. Kafka Summit (April 25–26, London)

Do you wake up morning after morning thinking about Kafka? Of course you do.

Meet up with other enthusiasts at the [Kafka Summit](https://www.kafka-
summit.org/), organized by [Confluent](https://www.confluent.io/). Expect to
see a healthy dose of stream processing content this year, and look out for
the talk from the data streaming manager at Porsche, Sridhar Mamella. We’ll be
there, too, demoing our new [no-code data transformation workflow](/product).
Come say hello!

You’ll find talks like this one where Jay Kreps and Dev Tagare explain modern
stream processing, real-time databases and Confluent Cloud — a fully managed,
serverless Kafka.  

## 4\. Introduction to GBFS and GTFS (April 27, Online)

Stream processing is hot in the mobility space, and the folks at [Mobility
Data](https://mobilitydata.org/event/introduction-to-gbfs-and-gtfs/) organize
events for the growing ecosystem. In April, it will run a one-hour webinar
introducing the GBFS and GTFS — two essential open data standards for shared
mobility. If you’re interested in the data mobility space, this is a great
place to start.  

## 5\. Berlin Buzzwords (June 12–14, Berlin)

[Berlin Buzzwords](https://2022.berlinbuzzwords.de/) is one of the premier
data conferences in Europe. It covers how to store, process, stream and search
data. The conference has existed for over ten years and continues to be a
meeting point for data engineers and data scientists. It’s worth visiting to
get an overview of the data scene.

It also has [an excellent blog
series](https://2021.berlinbuzzwords.de/success-stories) about people who have
participated in the conference over the years.  

## 6\. Data+AI Summit 2022 (June 27–30, San Francisco and online)

Find plenty of expo space and stimulating presentations about Apache Spark at
[Data+AI Summit](https://databricks.com/dataaisummit/north-america-2022). The
conference, organized by [Databricks](https://databricks.com/), gathers the
Apache Spark ecosystem.

The keynotes this year include Daphne Koller, the founder of
[Insitro](https://insitro.com/), a drug discovery company that uses machine
learning, and Zhamak Dehghani, the director of emerging technologies at
Thoughtworks. You don’t want to miss it.  

## 7\. Flink Forward (August 3, San Francisco)

The Flink community will converge at [Flink Forward](https://www.flink-
forward.org/sf-2022), a great place to learn about core Flink concepts and
meet more than 350 developers and data scientists. There is no news on the CfP
or tickets, but you can sign up for updates on its website.  

## 8\. Data Natives 2022 (Aug 31–Sept 1, Berlin)

Interested in discovering more about the future of the data economy and data
science? [Data Natives 2022](https://datanatives.io/conference/) will gather
5,000 people in Berlin to investigate what’s coming next and develop the
skills to meet it.

You know you’ll learn from the best at Data Natives; speakers at previous
conferences included Christopher Wiggins from the New York Times, the
executive director of ethics in entrepreneurship Erika Cheung and the co-
founder and chief data officer at Sefleuria Jessica Graves.  

## 9\. UpTime (September 14–15, Amsterdam)

Open data sources take center stage at UpTime, a new conference organized by
the open source cloud data platform [Aiven](https://aiven.io/). Head on over
if you’re interested in learning about the benefits of managed services and
engaging with an active, welcome community.

There’s still time to [submit to its call for
papers](https://sessionize.com/uptime-conference-2022/) — it closes on March
19!  

## Hang out with us

Stepping away from the keyboard for a few days to network and learn from
others can help enormously in your professional and personal growth.

You can meet up with us next at the [Kafka Summit](https://www.kafka-
summit.org/). Come say hello — we love meeting new people! In the meantime,
chat with us on [our community Slack](http://quix.io/slack-invite).





