---
title: "Quix: The in-memory data stream processing platform for Python professionals"
date: 2023-07-19
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: announcing-quix
description: >
  Announcing Quix, the first in-memory data stream processing platform for Python professionals looking to build real-time data applications.
categories:
  - announcements
---

# Quix: The in-memory data stream processing platform for Python professionals

Announcing Quix, the first in-memory data stream processing platform for Python professionals looking to build real-time data applications.

<!-- more -->

## Announcing Quix

[Today we announced](https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/quix-
secures-3-2-million-seed-financing-to-launch-its-streaming-analytics-
platform-301290207.html) that we raised a £2.3M Seed round led by Project A
Ventures, with participation from Passion Capital and a host of prominent
angel investors including Frank Sagnier (CEO, Codemasters), Ian Hogarth (Co-
founder, Songkick), Chris Schagen (CMO, Contentful) and Michael Schrezenmaier
(CEO, Pipedrive). With our Seed investment, Sam Cash joins our board of
directors and Malin Posern (Passion Capital) and Leo Lerach (Project A) join
as board observers.

[At Quix](/product), we believe that it will soon be essential for every
organization to automatically action data within milliseconds of it being
created. Whether it’s building hyper-personalized experiences, automating
mobility and industrial machinery, deploying smart wearables in healthcare, or
detecting fraud faster, the ability to run complex machine learning on live
streams of data and immediately respond to rapidly changing environments is
critical to delivering better experiences and outcomes to people.

While the past decade has seen a surge in big data technologies, they are too
difficult to use and too slow to respond to be useful for streaming
applications. Current systems are all architected around a database, with
teams working to combine multiple separate technology components into
platforms, which can extract this data and serve it to a model for production.
We know from experience that the database is in the way of teams who want to
build low-latency data-driven applications.

Quix is the first complete streaming analytics platform architected natively
around a message broker. Developers use a suite of APIs to stream data in and
out of our fully managed Kafka topics and work with our Python client library
and serverless compute environment to deploy real-time ML models directly to
the bleeding edge of live data in the broker. Finally, we provide a data
catalog that records every bit of data in the exact context as it was when
live streamed, this helps data scientists simulate live environments when
training models to ensure they work right the first time, every time.

We are focused on Python since it’s the language for data science and is fast
becoming the de-facto language among a growing community of citizen developers
the world over. These developers are most in need of enabling platforms. Quix
provides the platform, out of the box, that helps organizations operationalize
their real-time data science initiatives, faster.

Quix was built by experts in streaming data. The founders – Michael Rosam
(CEO), Tomas Neubauer (CTO), Peter Nagy (Head of Platform) and Patrick Mira
Pedrol (Head of Software) – worked together at the bleeding edge of real-time
data processing in McLaren Technology Group where they developed and
commercialized systems that now help F1 teams process huge volumes of data in-
flight, live during the race.

Starting with a clean sheet, the team was able to build the no-compromise
streaming analytics platform that lets every developer build streaming
applications, faster. Today, together with our funding announcement, we are
excited to announce the public beta launch of the Quix Portal, providing
developers with free access to a streaming analytics platform that removes all
barriers to building and operationalizing real-time ML & AI applications.

Our rapidly growing team is accelerating the development of our ambitious
roadmap, including an open-source community library of models and services,
and multi-cloud and multi-region support. We’re also excited to continue
integrating with existing data-science tools and third-party data components
like message brokers, databases and data lakes. If you’re interested in
working on any of these challenges, Quix is [hiring](/careers) across the
board.

And finally, while it is exciting to build a new company, it has been even
more exciting to see how the Quix Portal is being used to build applications
that previously would have required years of investment in complex
infrastructure, using just a few lines of Python code. We’ve been honored to
witness the explosion of streaming ML & AI applications from our early
adopters, from racing cars and electric vehicles to COVID testing and wearable
health tech, right through to personalized financial services and smart
factories, no industry will be left unaffected by the streaming analytics
revolution.

If you’re as excited about Quix as we are, we’d love to hear from you. [Sign
up](https://quix.io/signup) for a free Quix account, build an integration to
your data source, [join the Slack community](http://quix.io/slack-invite) and
say hello, or [apply to join](/careers) our growing team today!




## Check out the repo
Our Python client library is open source, and brings DataFrames and the Python ecosystem to stream processing.

[Star us on GitHub](https://github.com/quixio/quix-streams)


