---
title: "Discover new tools you’ll actually enjoy using (really!)"
date: 2023-07-12
authors: [steve-rosam]
slug: best-tools-for-stream-processing
description: >
  Members of the streaming community share their favorite tools — from backend development to organizing workflows to developing website copy. We have suggestions that you’ll actually enjoy using.
categories:
  - industry-insights
---

# Discover new tools you’ll actually enjoy using (really!)

Members of the streaming community share their favorite tools — from backend development to organizing workflows to developing website copy. We have suggestions that you’ll actually enjoy using.

<!-- more -->

## How do you discover new tools in a cutting-edge industry?

My colleague [Kiersten Thamm](https://www.linkedin.com/in/kierstenthamm/)
recently proved just how cutting-edge our industry is. At a stream processing
meetup, she asked the audience to stand up and then sit down based on the year
they’d first heard of stream processing. Some folks sat down immediately to
indicate they’d first heard of stream processing in 2022. By the time Kiersten
reached 2017, the whole audience had taken their seats. Stream processing is
so new that there aren’t textbooks and college courses to teach us how to do
it. We have to learn from each other as a community.

Not only do we need to collectively explore architectures, concepts and
systems but the tools we use to implement them. **How do you discover a great
new tool?** In tech, your answer might be Reddit, Stack Overflow, Twitter, a
developer community or an event. I asked around [The Stream community’s Slack
#general channel](http://quix.com/slack-invite). Here’s what I found out.  

## Data science superpowers

“As a Data Scientist, I focus on math analysis and love tools that give me the
superpower to be independent of data engineers and software engineers by
filling my software engineering skill gaps,” said [Javier
Blanco](https://www.linkedin.com/in/javier-blanco-
cordero-71373656/?locale=en_US), senior data scientist at Quix.

He’s a fan of [Streamlit](https://streamlit.io/) — what he calls “an amazing
way to build apps to present data interactively with super easy syntax.” Javi
recommends [MLFLow](https://mlflow.org/), an open-source platform for machine
learning, as a great way to automate and control ML artifacts, versions and
deployments.  

## Making the backend beautiful

[Patrick Mira](https://www.linkedin.com/in/patrickmira/?locale=en_US), Quix’s
head of software, highlighted tools he uses daily for backend development. He
called [GitKraken](https://www.gitkraken.com/) “the most beautiful and
intuitive Git client that I have ever tried.”

If you’re into Kubernetes — but not so enchanted with the CLI — Patrick
suggests [Lens](https://k8slens.dev/), a visual interface for Kubernetes that
might make you break up with the command line altogether.

[Robomongo](https://robomongo.org/), an old MongoDB graphic user interface,
is, in Patrick’s view, still one of the best (and free!). Studio 3T acquired
it, but it still provides a free-forever version called Robo 3T.

Senior software developer [Steve Rosam](https://www.linkedin.com/in/steven-
rosam-9889765b/?originalSubdomain=uk) chimed in on Patrick’s picks: “I’d like
to see if anyone else doing stream processing or real-time processing is using
anything vastly different.” Steve picked an entire suite of tools by
[Jetbrains](https://www.jetbrains.com/) as his first recommendation. “I used
to use visual studio for C# dev, but now use Pycharm for Python, Rider for C#
and Android, IntelliJ for Java,” Steve said. “These are really great tools
that help with productivity.”  

## Old-school tools that get the job done

Quix head of platform, [Peter
Nagy](https://www.linkedin.com/in/peternagy0/?originalSubdomain=uk),
highlights older tools in his picks for little-known tech that more people
should use. Like me, he’s a fan of [Loom](https://www.loom.com/looms/videos)
for asynchronous video and screen recording and sharing. Peter also puts [Open
Broadcaster Software](https://obsproject.com/) (OBS) on his list for
recordings. Steve added a +1 to Peter’s Loom and OBS Studio recommendations.
And as Quix’s video tutorial creator-in-chief, he picked
[Camtasia](https://www.techsmith.com/store/camtasia?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=1524774665&utm_content=58548108855&utm_term=camtasia&gclid=CjwKCAjwj42UBhAAEiwACIhADiwPEDP9qYOHzd8H9q-RG5HhBS_6BfJD9NtA9sg7kU0ixlL69jyfoBoCCC0QAvD_BwE)
and [Davinci
Resolve](https://www.blackmagicdesign.com/products/davinciresolve) for video
software.

“I’m sorry, I’m old school in this sense, but I favor [Total
Commander](https://www.ghisler.com/) for its multi-tab folder/ file management
over Windows Explorer any day,” Peter adds. The website alone is worth a
visit, with a throwback design that suggests its origin date: 1996.

I’m an unrepentant tab-hoarder and have yet to find the perfect solution for
my iOS world, but [there’s hope](https://mashable.com/article/organize-
browser-tabs). Meanwhile, for disk space hoarding and hogging, Peter
recommends[ WinDirStat](https://windirstat.net/) to get disk usage stats and
clean up the outsized files.

Peter also recommends [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/), a tool for having your
own local wiki with cross-linking for pages. It’s a knowledge base built on
plain text markdown files. Also, take a look at
[GitExtensions](http://gitextensions.github.io/), a super simple, super free
GUI git tool that gets the job done. “Yes, GitKraken looks nicer, but I still
like GE,” Peter says.  

## Getting the whole team organized

How do you track and organize development tickets? The Quix team uses
[Shortcut](https://shortcut.com/) (formerly Clubhouse … no, not that social
media platform, hence the name change). The team at Shortcut has rolled out
some great new features recently, and CEO Mike Rosam calls it “100 times
better than Jira” from Atlassian. I’ll add a +1 to that. Both Mike and
Kiersten also give upvotes to
[Notion](https://www.notion.so/product?utm_source=google&utm_campaign=2075789710&utm_medium=80211061601&utm_content=555234102421&utm_term=notion&targetid=aud-1053779029641:kwd-312974742&gclid=CjwKCAjwj42UBhAAEiwACIhADtp_CTYfIcWW2fDUSTH6cZTN_xVlPnyCiyKrsWizEljhtbgOFOl9ahoCTxoQAvD_BwE)
as a solution for the Quix team to test. Kiersten says it “a pleasant
collaboration tool — who knew it was possible?!”

As a marketer who is frequently creating and revising web pages, I’m obsessed
with [Bubbles](https://usebubbles.com/), an asynchronous collaboration tool.
Have you ever wanted to mark up a website and found yourself taking
screenshots, importing them into a doc or slide show, then adding comments?

Bubbles makes it easy for me to capture an entire web page, mark it up with
text or video and resolve comments bit by bit. Also, it’s free of cost,
installation and accounts.

I hope our team’s roundup of our favorite tech tools — especially those you
haven’t tried yet — helps you level up your productivity or developer
environment. [Contribute your favorite tools to the
conversation](http://quix.com/slack-invite).





