---
title: "Data for good: using streaming data to make lives better"
date: 2023-07-17
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: big-data-for-public-good
description: >
  Data stream processing paired with machine learning delivers big public benefits — with applications in healthcare, food security, public safety and transportation.
categories:
  - use-cases
---

# Data for good: using streaming data to make lives better

Data stream processing paired with machine learning delivers big public benefits — with applications in healthcare, food security, public safety and transportation.

<!-- more -->

## Big data isn’t all bad

A quick search for “Google and Facebook privacy concerns” reveals growing
backlash against buying and selling data. It’s little wonder when ads seem to
follow you across the internet and data theft and misuse regularly makes
headlines.

But I want to talk about another side of data: Data for good. You see, data
collection isn’t inherently bad. It’s all in how you use it (and protect it).
Many folks do amazing things with data — things that make our lives better.
And real-time stream processing can help those folks do even more amazing
things.  

## Using streaming data processing to deliver better experiences

[When I was at McLaren](/company), I worked on a Formula One fan engagement
project using real-time stream processing to help curate each fan’s race
experience. During a race, there are so many things to see. Fans can easily
get caught up in something happening on one side of their screen and miss the
action elsewhere.

The project used stream processing to monitor race data from hundreds of
sensors and deliver real-time alerts to users based on what they wanted to
see. We could enhance the experience and leave fans delighted by what they saw
instead of disappointed by the highlights they missed.

Delivering a great Formula 1 race experience might not change the world, but
it showed me how stream processing could help companies give people the right
experience at the right time. With Quix, I can help put the power of data
stream processing into the hands of people who can make lives better — whether
it’s a better retail experience, faster gaming, or improving access to
healthcare.  

## Solving challenges in the social sector with machine learning

I’m not the only one excited by the potential of AI, machine learning, and
data to make lives better. The authors of Stanford Social Innovation Review’s
“[Can Machine Learning Double Your Social
Impact?](https://ssir.org/articles/entry/can_machine_learning_double_your_social_impact)”
identified two common challenges in the social sector, that machine learning —
which relies on quality data — is particularly suited to solve.

Prevention problems: Machine learning and predictive algorithms can help
strategically deploy interventions, such as peacekeeping missions to places
[where violent conflict is likely to
occur](https://www.ted.com/talks/sean_gourley_the_mathematics_of_war), or
[health interventions to prevent
disease](https://www.uchicagomedicine.org/forefront/heart-and-vascular-
articles/research-sets-sights-on-heart-disease-discoveries-through-precision-
cardiology-and-bioinformatics) in places where outbreaks are likely.

Data void problems: Nonprofits and governments often lack the data they need
to identify the places that would benefit most from services. With machine
learning, they can derive better insights from existing data and use those to
prioritize and coordinate efforts for greater impact.  

## Four ways stream processing big data solves big problems

Data degrades fast. In the time it takes a system to collect, store, process
and return data, the information has often changed. With AI, machine learning,
and real time stream processing, we can use data in ways that would otherwise
be impossible.

Stream processing opens up opportunities for us to respond in real time and
make changes as a situation unfolds. We can improve outcomes now, not just in
the future.  

### Helping busy doctors deliver more personalized healthcare

Doctors are busy and, like all humans, they occasionally miss things or make
mistakes. While machines won’t replace them, machine learning combined with
real time stream processing can help reduce the strain and provide a second
set of eyes.

In intensive care settings, predictive algorithms help doctors monitor
patients and analyze risk in real time, enabling them to prioritize patients
at highest risk of adverse events. The University of Chicago Medicine credits
a [predictive algorithm powered by streaming
data](https://www.tibco.com/customers/university-chicago-medicine) with
reducing the number of cardiac arrests in the hospital by an estimated 15% to
20%.

Outside the hospital setting, stream processing helps doctors monitor patients
in real time to improve outcomes. Wearable devices can transmit vitals,
monitor progress after joint replacement surgery and recommend changes based
on patient data and treatment protocols. This digital assistance saves doctors
time and enables them to provide better care to more people.  

### Using sensor data to make cities safer and more efficient

Managing a city is a big job, especially in older cities that weren’t built
with today’s challenges in mind. Smart cities are experimenting with data and
technology to make city management more effective in a digital world.

In much the same way that manufacturing companies use sensors to monitor and
improve processes, cities are gathering data to improve traffic, reduce
emergency response times, coordinate city services, improve parking and reduce
crime.

Coral Gables, a community in Florida, reduced crime by 40% in two years using
predictive analytics, artificial intelligence and other tools at their
community intelligence center, Chief Innovation Officer Raimundo Rodulfo,
explains in State Tech Magazine’s “[8 Smart Cities to Watch in 2020 and
Beyond.](https://statetechmagazine.com/article/2020/11/8-smart-cities-
watch-2020)”  

### Matching people to the resources they need

Distributing resources to maximize access and minimize waste is a vexing
problem for many companies. It’s also a problem on a global scale. We already
grow enough food to feed everyone on the planet, according to the [Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations](http://www.fao.org/sustainable-development-goals/goals/goal-2/en/).
The challenge is getting that food to the people who need it.

[Ayazona](https://www.ayazona.com/) and [Ignite
Labs](https://www.ayazona.com/ignite) are using data and machine learning to
tackle food security in Africa while aiming for zero waste. Their technology
enables food partners to make excess food that would ordinarily be wasted
available to middle- and low-income households at half the cost. Machine
learning and AI tools turn that data into a weekly list of groceries designed
to fit the budgets of these households.  

### Improving efficiency to tackle transportation challenges

The pandemic has indelibly changed our world in ways that many of us couldn’t
imagine. A global labor shortage is forcing companies to be more efficient
with the resources that they do have. Using real time stream processing to
optimize processes and increase efficiency is one way to help a small labor
force accomplish more.

As many states in the US face busing shortages, [Karros
Technologies](https://karrostechnologies.com/) is aiming to become the world
leader in student transportation through route optimization, real time GPS
tracking and predictive machine learning that reconciles planned routes with
live data.  

## What excites me about Quix

Solutions are born when a person sees a need and has the tools to solve the
problem. Quix puts the problem-solving power of real time stream processing
into the hands of more people.

We make it easy for any Python developer to stream data and process it with
real time machine learning models. You get the same quality and reliability as
the world’s leading machine learning organizations — without any of the
hassle, time and investment needed to set up the underlying infrastructure.

In other words, we remove the hurdles so that you can run with your idea and
make an impact sooner. Want to try it for yourself? [Sign up for a free
trial](https://quix.io/signup), which comes with $240 per year in free Quix
credit to get your PoC off the ground. If you have any questions, jump in our
[community Slack](http://quix.io/slack-invite).





