---
title: "Three ways to increase the value you get from the data you already collect"
date: 2023-07-12
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: how-to-increase-data-value-from-the-data-you-already-have
description: >
  Data’s value depends on how you use it. We’ll look at three ways to increase the value you get from the data you’re already collecting.
categories:
  - industry-insights
---

# Three ways to increase the value you get from the data you already collect

Data’s value depends on how you use it. We’ll look at three ways to increase the value you get from the data you’re already collecting.

<!-- more -->

How does your company use the data it collects? Are you using analytics tools
and dashboards to track performance, identify trends and make decisions? Are
you tapping into data to monitor processes, personalize user experiences and
automate functions? Is it a core part of the products and services your
company offers?

Data’s value all depends on how you use it. And companies are pushing to do
more with their data. We see this in the increasing demand for data experts
and the expanded ecosystem of data tools.

In this post, we’ll look at three ways to increase the value you get from data
you’re already collecting. All of these can be implemented by a small data
team or even a single data engineer with the [right tools](/blog/release-
pipeline-open-source-library).  

## 1\. Make data more accessible to everyone downstream

Companies collect far more data than they use.
[Splunk](https://www.splunk.com/en_us/form/the-state-of-dark-data.html)
estimates that 55-75% of an organization’s data is dark data — a rather
ominous term for data that goes unused after being collected, processed and
stored.

Often this happens because the data is inaccessible to people with the domain
expertise to use it. An operations manager with deep knowledge of how business
processes work might not have the data expertise to understand the data those
processes generate. In some cases, people don’t even know that data they could
use is being collected.

A disconnect between data collection and use happens when data is collected
without thinking about how people downstream will access and work with it.
Data ends up stuck in silos or dumped into data lakes where it becomes a mess
to find and use. Domain experts can’t access the data without a data engineer,
and even then they have to wait for the data to be transformed into a usable
format — a process that can take days or weeks.

### How to do it: increase data access with tools and training

Companies can make data more accessible by looking at both ends of the data
pipeline. This means improving the way data is collected and stored, as well
as ensuring that end users have the skills they need to work with the data.
Let’s look at some examples and talk about how smaller companies and startups
can implement these ideas.

### Improving data infrastructure

Data engineers at [Uber](https://eng.uber.com/no-code-workflow-orchestrator/)
were unable to keep up with data demands from the company’s growing number of
analysts and city operations managers. Requests that should have taken hours
to complete were taking days or weeks. An internal study revealed that these
delays were costing millions in lost productivity.

To improve data access, they built a no-code interface called uWorc that
enables employees to build their own batch or stream processing data pipelines
using a no-code interface.

Empowering employees to access and use streaming data is a complex undertaking
that used to be out of reach for smaller companies. Fortunately, Quix is
changing that with our stream processing solution.

With Quix, [a single data engineer can implement a stream processing
layer](/use-cases/data-engineering). This enables companies to process data as
it streams in, adding structure and context so that it’s ready for analysis or
connection with analytics tools. What’s more, Quix includes features, like
permissions and parallel sandboxes, that enable data teams to open up access
without jeopardizing the production environment.

### Cultivating citizen developers

When we were building Quix, we observed that many product managers, mechanical
engineers and other domain experts were learning code so that they could work
with data. Like the managers at Uber, they were eager to get their hands on
the data they needed. Unfortunately, Python, one of the most popular coding
languages, isn’t supported by most stream processing solutions.

More access to data equals more value from data. So we built Quix to increase
access by enabling anyone with a basic knowledge of Python to work with data,
even streaming data.

Companies can take a page out of [Levi Strauss & Co.’s
playbook](https://www.techtarget.com/searchhrsoftware/news/252513898/In-house-
AI-boot-camp-pays-off-for-Levi-Strauss) and encourage employees to learn
Python. Levi Strauss did this with an eight-week AI bootcamp where employees
learned to write Python scripts, automate processes, and use data to solve
problems. Graduates left with the ability to use data in their day-to-day work
without relying on a data expert.  

## 2\. Reduce the time between data creation and use

Digital consumers move fast. Market conditions change fast. Even as data is
collected, it’s already changing. A buying decision made on yesterday’s data
will miss today’s price increase. A perfectly crafted social media post will
fall flat if user sentiment changes before it goes live.

To make the best decisions, people need access to data immediately. Real-time
data provides the latest on social media sentiment, fraud detection,
connectivity, price fluctuations and process or machinery failures.

Learning things after the fact isn’t nearly as satisfying as spotting a
warning sign and diverting a disaster, or jumping on an unexpected
opportunity. More immediate access to data makes those insights more valuable.
It enables decision-makers to understand, decide and act without delay.

### How to do it: Use stream processing to provide real-time data

Stream processing is the key to real-time data. By processing events as they
happen, companies can build real-time dashboards that are always fresh. And
this is just the first step, as companies [progress in data
maturity](/blog/data-maturity-journey-data-integration), stream processing
capabilities open the door to machine learning and automation.  

## 3\. Use ML and automation to transform data directly into action

While some decisions require a human touch, there are many cases where machine
learning (ML) can be used to automate decisions using real-time data.
Transforming data directly into action enables services and devices to be more
responsive, adding value for the end user and by extension, the company
providing those services.

Combining streaming data processing with machine learning and automation
enables you to act on data in real-time, opening up new ways to use the data
you already collect.

**Respond immediately to time-sensitive data:** ML and automation are
especially useful when every second matters. [Leading banks use ML](/use-
cases/finance) with live data to block crime in real time. In the [telco
industry](/use-cases/telco), millisecond-precision monitoring helps detect
issues and automatically redirect resources to maximize up-time. [Real-time
data from medical devices](https://www.tibco.com/customers/university-of-
chicago-medicine) can trigger life-saving alerts and sensor data on vehicles
and machinery can trigger preventative maintenance or shut a machine down
before it breaks.

**Reduce latency to improve customer experience and conversion rates:** We
know that speed is important in customer-facing applications, but Booking.com,
the world’s largest online travel agent, demonstrated just how important
[reducing latency](/blog/reduce-latency-with-stream-processing) is. In an
[analysis](https://blog.kevinhu.me/2021/04/25/25-Paper-Reading-Booking.com-
Experiences/bernardi2019.pdf) of about 150 successful customer-facing
applications of machine learning, they found that an increase of about 30% in
latency can negatively impact conversion rate by more than 0.5%.

**Enhance IoT devices with data-driven features:** IoT devices provide rich
data sets that can be used for personalization and other data-driven features.
The challenge is that building the infrastructure to process that data
requires different skills than building the device itself. Implementing a
streaming solution like Quix helps IoT device creators launch features faster.
How much faster? [Stream processing helped one company launch personalized
wearable devices 300% faster.](/blog/stream-processing-for-iot-devices)

### How to do it: Use streaming data to train models faster

ML and AI models are powerful tools, but it can be a long road from idea to
production. A Dotscience report revealed that 64.4% of industry professionals
surveyed take 7-18 months to develop ML and AI models.

In a fast-paced world, that’s just not fast enough. Again, Quix is here to
help with our production-ready stream processing platform. See how we helped
one company stand up, train, test and deploy 82 ML models in just two weeks.

### Quix helps companies get more value from their data

Data is more valuable when it’s accessible, immediate and responsive. We
believe that stream processing is the key to unlocking this value by making
the data you collect:

**Accessible** – Stream processing enables companies to clean, process and add
context to data before it’s dumped into storage.

**Immediate** – Because data is processed in motion, it’s immediately
available for use by people, analytics tools and devices.

**Responsive** – Real-time data can be used to build responsive services and
devices. IoT devices can act on the data they collect in real-time,
performance monitoring and fraud detection can trigger an immediate response,
and field applications can automatically adjust to optimize connectivity and
productivity.

Quix puts the power of stream processing into the hands of smaller data teams,
startups and citizen developers. We handle the complexity of maintaining a
reliable stream processing infrastructure and provide tools that enable people
across the organization to use streaming data. Not just data experts.





