---
title: "Three ways customer-centric companies are using real-time data"
date: 2023-07-17
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: stream-processing-real-time-customer-data
description: >
  Companies that shift from batch data to stream processing are making big gains in speed, responsiveness and product development.
categories:
  - use-cases
---

# Three ways customer-centric companies are using real-time data

Companies that shift from batch data to stream processing are making big gains in speed, responsiveness and product development.

<!-- more -->

## How real-time stream processing enables customer-centric, data-driven
growth

When is a gift not a gift? A good data team with the right tools can engage
customers with data-driven, customer-centric products and experiences. But
companies that lack efficient data management tools and processes waste
valuable time drowning in too much information.

Because customers require more personalized experiences and products tailored
to them, efficient tools that help you use data in real time are a critical
business priority.

McKinsey & Company recently identified data management, making decisions and
real-time performance measurement as three of the [five technologies needed to
power customer-centric, data-driven
growth](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/consumer-packaged-goods/our-
insights/five-technology-building-blocks-to-power-customer-centric-data-
driven-growth).  

![Graphic showing the 5 building blocks of Martech and data
enablement.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64b93ea055613405155145fb_5-building-
blocks-explaining-banner.webp)

###### Image source: McKinsey & Company, “[Five technology building blocks to
power customer-centric, data-driven
growth](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/consumer-packaged-goods/our-
insights/five-technology-building-blocks-to-power-customer-centric-data-
driven-growth),” October 2021  

At the top of the list of challenges, according to McKinsey, are an
organization’s ability to access customer data; and the demand to build
engines that make decisions about how to process it. These are the next big
problems that companies must solve to become both data-driven and customer
centric.

Moving from batch processing to stream processing, also known as in-memory or
real-time processing, is part of the solution.  

> _“Moving from batch processing to stream processing, also known as in-memory
> or real-time processing, is part of the solution.”_

## Batch vs. stream processing

Siloed data systems that collect, store and process data in batches slow down
data scientists and engineers who want to quickly access and operationalize
data across their organization. Batch processing is particularly challenging
when reducing latency and delivering powerful computing in real time. The
back-and-forth between systems leaves companies one step behind their
customers at every turn.

Stream processing overcomes these challenges by cutting out the back-and-forth
and processing data as it flows into a system. Companies that use stream
processing with their existing batch-processing systems deliver timely,
relevant experiences. That means their products stay personalized to each
individual at every moment.  

## Three ways that stream processing enables companies to be more customer-
centric

### 1\. Speed: when seconds matter, streaming data delivers the speed your
customers need

“Fast adaptation is everything when it comes to being customer centric,”
writes Steven Van Belleghem in [The five biggest myths about customer
centricity](https://www.stevenvanbelleghem.com/blog/the-5-biggest-myths-about-
customer-centricity/). “If the customer changes direction, so should you.”  

>  _“Fast adaptation is everything when it comes to being customer centric. If
> the customer changes direction, so should you.”_

Part of delivering things at the right time comes down to speed: being first
to market and providing digital products with low latency and fast page loads.
Seconds matter when you’re trying to beat the time it takes a customer to lose
interest.

[Control](https://www.cntrl.io/) provides a telemetry system that
automatically switches cellular towers for optimal performance as drivers race
around the track. It sounds like a small thing, but being just a bit faster
can make a big difference if you’re driving a race car. The same goes for
manufacturing parts or streamlining an ecommerce experience.  

### 2\. Responsiveness: accessing IoT data streams enables real-time feedback
loops

Another aspect of speed is responsiveness to current events and changing
customer behavior. A digital twin is an advanced digital model that uses real-
time data to update the model continuously.

Digital twins can help companies understand and anticipate the needs of
anything from a machine on the assembly line to a patient in intensive care.
With the ability to process multiple data streams in real time, digital twins
can rapidly calculate likely outcomes as the variables change.

The use of a digital twin model to help with ventilation/intubation decisions
during the early months of the COVID pandemic offered an incredibly cool
example of this method. Project BreathEasy gathered a consortium of experts to
build a model using real-time stream processing and artificial intelligence to
predict ventilation requirements for individual patients.

![Diagram showing the steps involved in creating a 3D model of lungs for
medical research.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64b93f9a88a9fb7db0b59530_Project-
BreathEasy-banner.webp)

###### Image source: [Project BreathEasy: Digital Twins of lungs to improve
COVID-19 patients outcomes](https://onscale.com/blog/project-breatheasy-
digital-twins-of-lungs-to-improve-covid-19-patients-outcomes/)  

This type of real-time feedback loop can pull data from any IoT device or
sensor. Companies can use digital twins to provide personalized service
appointments for drivers before the check engine light comes on. It’s also
helpful for predicting and scheduling maintenance for machinery and targeting
ads to runners based on how many miles they log in Strava. The list of
exciting possibilities never ends.  

### 3\. Product development: real-time data enables customer-driven product
development

When you deeply understand your customers, you can create experiences they
didn’t even know they wanted or needed. Think of it as gift-giving. It’s great
when someone gets you something from your gift list, but getting something
that is both unexpected and perfect brings even more joy.

“The key tenet of human-centered design is you don’t develop for a corporate
or a role, you develop for a person […] the simplest possible thing is to
listen to clients…”

**Hari Moorthy, Global Head of Goldman Sachs Transaction Banking | SIBOS Conference 2020**

To do that successfully, the giver — in this case, your brand — needs to be
observant. Brands do so by accessing and understanding the data that customers
share through both their expressed preferences, and their more subtle digital
actions.

Netflix uses stream processing to [reduce computing needs and
latency](/blog/reduce-latency-with-stream-processing) in its recommendation
engine, which delivers hyper-personalized results in real time. The
recommendation engine is responsible for more than 80% of all Netflix viewing.

But that’s not all. The streaming video giant also [uses real-time data to
develop original
content](https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomokoyokoi/2021/03/02/getting-started-
in-hyper-personalization/?sh=2760501d2b4d). By deeply understanding different
audience types — when they watch, what they watch, which actors they prefer —
Netflix can tailor original content to resonate with specific audiences.

Using customer data to drive product development might be the epitome of
becoming a data-driven, customer-centric company.  

## Quix makes real-time data accessible and actionable

“Stop worrying about what is streaming, what is batching, all that stuff. Try
to get that as automated as possible. […] It’s infeasible to have people worry
about streaming and batch, and the interoperability. There has to be a fluid
space between them.”

[**Rajesh Nishtala, Realtime Data Engineer,
Facebook**](https://qconsf.com/sf2017/presentation/data-decisions-realtime-
stream-processing?utm_source=infoq&utm_medium=news&utm_campaign=06102017news)

Real-time stream processing is an exciting advance in data management, but
[the challenge of building the infrastructure for stream
processing](/blog/why-is-streaming-data-so-hard-to-handle) can block teams and
companies from accessing it. That’s where Quix comes in. We [empower the
customer-obsessed people](/blog/empower-employees-real-time-data) in your
organization to access and use real-time data without building their own
stream-processing system.

Find out [how Quix can help you](/use-cases) access and use customer insights
in real time. [Sign up for a free account](https://quix.io/signup) and get
started today. If you’d like some support, chat with us in [our Slack
community](http://quix.io/slack-invite).





