---
title: "The Stream — December 2021 edition"
date: 2023-07-17
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: the-stream-december-2021
description: >
  The December 2021 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.
categories:
  - industry-insights
---

# The Stream — December 2021 edition

The December 2021 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.

<!-- more -->

We’re wrapping up an exciting year for Quix — just seven months since our
product launched, we’ve seen incredible enthusiasm from customers, new users
(yes, [our product is still free to try](https://quix.io/signup), with no
credit card required), and thousands of developers who want to learn more
about data stream processing.

Even though stream processing is relatively new, my co-founders and I have a
combined two decades of experience with it. First, we made it work for
[McLaren’s Formula One team](/company). Now we’re making it work for countless
[industries](/use-cases), from manufacturing to [gaming](/use-cases/gaming),
from automotive to [mobility](/use-cases/mobility), [telco](/use-cases/telco),
[ecommerce](/use-cases/ecommerce), [finance](/use-cases/finance), and the list
goes on.

I encourage you to look at these [industry use cases](/use-cases) to learn
more about how Quix can accelerate your business. Watch our blog, too — we’re
highlighting stream processing use cases ranging from [personalization in
house hunting and healthcare](/blog/stream-processing-use-case-
personalization) to [using stream processing for social
good](https://quix.io/blog/big-data-for-public-good/).

We’re out in the community sharing how [data scientists](/use-cases/data-
science) and [data engineers](/use-cases/data-engineering) can use stream
processing to build better data pipelines and get ML projects to production
faster.

At the [Data Science Festival](https://www.datasciencefestival.com/) in London
a few weeks ago, my colleagues carried off a mix of audience input, live data,
and coding on the fly to deliver real-time stream processing. With all of
these variables, what can go wrong? That’s why we call it “the most dangerous
demo.”

We released a white paper full of analyst insights and third-party research
about [how stream processing will transform the modern data stack](/blog/data-
stream-processing-trends) for business leaders.

Finally, I promised you last month that we’d have a big product announcement.
It’s here — read on for our introduction to [Quix’s new online
IDE](/blog/release-stream-processing-online-ide), complete with built-in
connectors to live data streams.

As always, the Quix team is eager to help you get your project off to a great
start. You can [book a chat](https://calendly.com/clara-quix/30min) with our
friendly experts to talk through your project goals and technical challenges.
Or come chat with us on [Slack](http://quix.io/slack-invite).

My colleagues and I all wish you a safe and happy holiday season!  

![Diagram showing the process of Quix production.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ba6d6f443f47cb056dc280_Quix-
production-broker.webp)

## Introducing: Quix’s online IDE and live data connectors

How to accelerate building real-time data-driven products? Skip traditional
CI/CD development. Our IDE lets you build and test code against real, live
data streams.  

[**Inside our major release**](/blog/release-stream-processing-online-ide)

![Screenshot of Quix website showing overview, use cases, pricing, and sign up
for free trial.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ba6dde207f66103ecdf9f4_Automate-
analytics.webp)

## Automate your product analytics

Here’s how Quix used data stream processing for our own product analytics,
complete with automations and alerting.

[**Insights in an instant →**](/blog/case-study-product-analytics)

![Diagram showing the stages of a data pipeline.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ba6e33106fa4f36fe995af_Serverless-
compute.webp)

## How does serverless compute work for stream processing?

Learn more about serverless infrastructure for live data. We break it down
with a super-speedy explanation and video.

[**Insider’s guide →**](/blog/serverless-compute-video-explainer)

![Screenshot of The Stream Processing Revolution.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ba6f07bf40810477182a93_Stream-
processing.webp)

## Can stream processing save us from drowning in data lakes?

Get the in-depth whitepaper with research from analysts and industry experts
on how stream processing will revolutionize data management, analytics and
ops.

[**Deep dive →**](/blog/data-stream-processing-trends)

## More insights

  * Big data, big impact: [Use cases for stream processing](/blog/big-data-for-public-good) that serve the public good and make lives better.
  * Is it on? Quix’s new [service status page](https://status.quix.ai/?__hstc=175542013.47788df652e6c40c4f592430dcaa100f.1686578338159.1689418230899.1689568336719.24&__hssc=175542013.51.1689568336719&__hsfp=524412920) keeps you up to date. Find it in the website footer.
  * What’s new? Check out our [changelog](/changelog), with new features, improvements, helpful tips and resources, and bug fixes.





