---
title: "The Stream — May 2022 edition"
date: 2023-07-12
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: the-stream-may-2022
description: >
  The May 2022 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.
categories:
  - industry-insights
---

# The Stream — May 2022 edition

The May 2022 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.

<!-- more -->

## At Quix, we say that real-time stream processing is human

[Humans can’t survive without continuously processing and acting on data as it
arrives.](/blog/history-streaming-real-time-data) We take in information from
our environment, transform it with various biological processes and react
immediately. Most human activities involve real-time stream processing, even
if our bodies run systems without our conscious awareness.

Imagine if humans didn’t do this. What if we operated on batch processing?
What would happen if we took photographs every thirty seconds to analyze once
a day rather than constantly looking around? How would it go if we relied on
historical data to navigate grocery stores? Life would be a lot like herding
cats. (Well, certainly a lot worse than that.)

We need our technology to rely on stream processing so that it can better
support human activity. Data tech increasingly supports our personal and
business lives, and that’s not going to stop anytime soon. The products and
tools we build to help people make financial decisions for their families and
companies, doctors to diagnose patients, and smart cities to operate
sustainably cannot succeed if they function slower than the markets, biology,
and vehicles. Without stream processing, data products and tools can’t keep up
with humans and human society.

Thankfully, the fact that streaming is human makes streaming architecture a
little less overwhelming to conceptualize, build, maintain and improve. We
think that individuals and teams can overcome streaming challenges with a
stack of the right microservices. Challenges might still exist, but they don’t
stem from fundamental ideas.  

![Person sharing his screen on a meeting.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ae8ae6ff411b4d023cb61f_Person-
sharing-his-screen-on-a-meeting.webp)

## Learn how to build a sentiment analysis Python service that connects,
transforms and delivers data in real time

At the London Python User Group meetup in April, Tomas Neubauer and Javier
Blanco built a chat application that keeps out unwanted language and tracks
the positive or negative quality of each message let in. You can build it too.

[**Build along with the demo**](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aybpec6I1ZE)

![Person on the stage of Kafka summit London.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ae8b468c5503e776515864_Person-on-
the-stage-of-kafka-summit-London.webp)

## Kafka Summit London 2022: The Full Recap

Kafka Summit returned in all its glory to welcome over 1,200 people — real
human beings — back to discuss steam processing in person.

[**Read Robin Moffatt’s recap →**](https://www.confluent.io/blog/kafka-summit-
london-2022-recap/)

![Three app icons on black background.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ae8bd5f3a055aedee87729_Three-app-
icons-on-black-background.webp)

## Building a real-time chat app with React, Laravel and Ably

You use real-time communication every day when you exchange information
between a sender and a receiver with almost zero latency. Learn how to build a
real-time public chat app using React.js, Laravel and Ably.

[**Build it for yourself →**](https://ably.com/blog/building-a-realtime-chat-
app-with-react-laravel-and-websockets)

![Woman talking on stage at a presentation.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ae8c105e46a55766c76e4a_Woman-
talking-on-stage-at-a-presatation.webp)

## The Stream is out and about in May

Meet Quix and other streamers at the World Data Summit in Amsterdam, DevOps
Pro Europe and Machine Learning Prague 2022.

[**Register for events →**](/community)

## More insights

We hope you had a wonderful Star Wars Day. ⭐ Please enjoy Montreal Analytics’s
[competition for the best Star Wars-data
meme](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/montreal-analytics_may-the-4th-be-with-
you-in-honour-
activity-6927624728803209218-lnmP/?utm_source=linkedin_share&utm_medium=member_desktop_web).  

![Collage of four images in a meme.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64ae8cc85d862bba5bd57695_Star-wars-
meme.webp)





