---
title: "The Stream — March 2022 edition"
date: 2023-07-12
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: the-stream-march-2022
description: >
  The March 2022 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.
categories:
  - industry-insights
---

# The Stream — March 2022 edition

The March 2022 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.

<!-- more -->

There’s no instruction manual for stream processing. With established
technology, there are volumes of information about how to do something better
— books, blogs, user groups, reference architectures. But with an emerging
technology as complex and varied as data stream processing, it’s a brave new
world.

That’s why Quix is sponsoring the first community dedicated to figuring this
all out. We’re calling it The Stream. Whether you’ve been processing data on a
message broker like Kafka for a while, or you’re simply stream-curious, you’re
welcome. You’ll find friends and helpful allies here.

Our community connects on Slack and in person at meetups. Our first two live
events are in Berlin this month. You should be a part of the community if you:

**Work with data** — whether as a software developer, data scientist, or
engineer of another stripe. We’re having great conversations with mechanical
and electrical engineers who focus on building IoT devices and need the data
stream processing backbone to make them go.

**Write code in Python** — while many data-oriented technologies have centered
on SQL, and streaming data has roots in Java and Scala for software
engineering, we’re focusing on Python because it’s easy to use (making
streaming accessible to newcomers), extensive (there’s a huge ecosystem of
packages, like Pandas, that do much of the work for you) and incredibly
flexible (making streaming useful to anyone from any industry).

**Are interested in real-time data** — you recognize the power and potential
of streaming data, migrating workloads from batch to stream processing, or
realizing the benefits of it such as lower latency, more efficient use of
compute resources, and real-time automation or ML.

I believe passionately in streaming data. It will be the defining technology
of this era. The 2010s focus on big data is giving way to faster architectures
that enable you to build new product categories.

It’s early days, and innovation can be complicated. I believe this community
will be coming together to better understand not only how to use stream
processing, but also when not to. We’re not about technology for technology’s
sake. We’re about finding new and better ways to handle the massive volume and
velocity of data that’s streaming in from IoT devices and digital experiences
every day.

Our community’s goals are learning, supporting each other, and helping to
develop connected devices and data-driven products faster, easier and more
efficiently.

You might use Quix for that. You might not. Either way, you’re welcome and we
hope to make the community a valuable forum and connection for you.

[Start today on the Slack channel](http://quix.io/slack-invite) and introduce
yourself. Drop a meeting on my calendar to [talk about your use
case](https://calendly.com/clara-quix/30min). I’m excited by the potential our
community can collectively realize. Join us!  

![The stream on black background.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64aead4abeff20c1d88e6a04_Introducing-
The-Stream.webp)

## Meet The Stream in person

We’re gathering in Berlin on March 31, 2022 to talk about the ins and outs of
stream processing.

[**Join us**](https://www.meetup.com/Big-Data-Berlin/events/284525117)

![Two people in a dessert.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64aead8b2cd4625124e41946_Two-people-
in-a-dessert.webp)

## Can better data help policy makers and communities build resilience?

How can streaming data help fight against food insecurity? “By using machine
learning and other tools, high-frequency data collected by MIRA has greater
potential to predict food insecurity outcomes and identify households likely
to be most affected by shocks and stressors.”

[**Read more →**](https://povertyevidence.org/can-better-data-help-policy-
makers-and-communities-build-resilience/)

![White background showing letters from A to H.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64aeadbd66b9df20cb48f015_Stream-
processing-glossary.webp)

## A glossary for stream processing

We’ve put together a long list of terms and definitions important to stream
processing. You won’t find anything specifically about Quix in there; it’s as
wide-reaching and inclusive as possible to help anyone navigate the world of
real-time data.

[**Check it out →**](/blog/stream-processing-glossary)

## More insights

  * [Data Council](https://www.datacouncil.ai/austin) offers a “100% no bullsh*t guarantee” event about data science, engineering and analytics. You’ll want to join for the easy networking and the abundance of speakers across six learning tracks. There’s something for everyone here.
  * The European Union has proposed an addition to its digital rulebook. Read about it on [TechCrunch](https://techcrunch.com/2022/02/23/eu-data-act/?guccounter=1).
  * [Niyi Odumosu](https://www.confluent.io/blog/bring-your-own-monitoring-with-confluent-cloud/), Associate Solutions Architect at Confluent, uses the Metrics API, Docker, Prometheus, Grafana, Splunk and Datadog to put together a full monitoring solution for your Confluent Cloud deployment.
  * To settle some confusion about the terms real time and stream processing, check out [How stream processing goes beyond real-time](https://devops.com/how-stream-processing-goes-beyond-real-time/).





