---
title: "The Stream — February 2022 edition"
date: 2023-07-13
authors: [mike-rosam]
slug: the-stream-february-2022
description: >
  The February 2022 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.
categories:
  - industry-insights
---

# The Stream — February 2022 edition

The February 2022 edition of The Stream: covering this month in stream processing on the internet.

<!-- more -->

## A roundup of our best content and product updates

The best proof of Quix’s product, besides [trying it
yourself](http://quix.io/signup), is the inside story of how one of our
customers solved a major business problem. In this month’s edition of our
newsletter, we highlight two major case studies.

First, how did a race-winning telemetry company use Quix to increase
performance and resiliency? This [case study](/blog/network-connectivity-and-
resiliency) features our customer Control, which was able to reduce hands-on
time for its engineers while ensuring peak connectivity from anywhere on the
racetrack. I think the most impressive aspect of this use case is the fact
that we delivered 82 machine learning models in just two weeks’ time.

Second, take a deep dive into the [business strategy behind usage-based
billing](/blog/usage-based-pricing-strategy), which delivers maximum value for
both customers and companies. It’s no wonder this pricing model is rapidly
replacing subscription models in SaaS and beyond. My colleague Patrick Mira
Pedrol, our Head of Software, invested months in this technical project for
Quix and gives you the [all-access tour in his deeply technical
post](/blog/how-to-build-usage-based-pricing).

But maybe I’m getting ahead of myself. You might be wondering about this whole
data stream processing revolution, too. And truth be told, it can be [a bit
scary](/blog/why-is-streaming-data-so-hard-to-handle) — especially since it
was once solely the domain of big tech companies and their army of
infrastructure engineers.

So in addition to case studies, we’re reporting on some fantastic use cases in
stream processing (regardless of whether they use Quix to make it easier).
Stream processing helps organizations:

  * [Enable more customer-centric data](/blog/three-ways-customer-centric-companies-are-using-real-time-data), featuring stories from Netflix, Strava and Project BreathEasy
  * [Empower employees](/blog/empower-employees-real-time-data), featuring stories from Levis and John Deere
  * [Scale up massively](/blog/scaling-stream-processing), for the likes of Twitter and Alibaba
  * [Serve the greater good](/blog/big-data-for-public-good), such as in the cases of the University of Chicago Medical Center, Ayazona and Karros
  * [Reduce latency](/blog/reduce-latency-with-stream-processing), which helped Booking.com, Goldman Sachs and GoSpotCheck
  * [Improve personalization](/blog/stream-processing-use-case-personalization), featuring house hunting app Trulia and healthcare applications from Etiometry

Here’s a sample of the real business gains these organizations reported:  

![Real time business gains.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64b7ea7129dd9dee7ce8d618_Real-time-
business-gains.webp)

Enjoy this month’s newsletter with highlights of our top content. And if
you’ve got a use case, let’s talk. [Book a
consultation](https://calendly.com/clara-quix/30min) to chat with us about
your project.  

![Multiple open windows on desktop.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64b7eebecf405aa8b479d92b_Multiple-
open-windows-on-desktop.webp)

## Pay as you grow

An insider’s guide to building a bulletproof usage-based billing system. Get
the business strategy and the deep technical details of this project in a two-
part series  

[**How we built it**](/blog/how-to-build-usage-based-pricing)

![White racing car.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64b7ef02c20b018283b96597_White-
racing-car.webp)

## Two weeks, 82 ML models, one goal: performance

See how Quix customer Control delivers on its race-winning telemetry promise,
in an intriguing case study that significantly reduced hands-on engineering
time.

[**The network effect →**](/blog/network-connectivity-and-resiliency)

![Customer centric data illustration.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64b7ef52afa12f16f637604b_Customer-
centric-data.webp)

## How to take a customer-centric approach to data

Three ways that data stream processing helps organizations deliver better
customer experiences, from greater responsiveness to product feedback loops.

[**For the customer-obsessed →**](/blog/three-ways-customer-centric-companies-
are-using-real-time-data)

![Future modern data stack conference banner.](https://uploads-
ssl.webflow.com/64a7eed956ba9b9a3c62401d/64b7ef835c07f50dcc490e5d_Future-
modern-data-stack.webp)

## The future of the modern data stack

Just as cloud replaced on-prem, data processing is moving from static to
highly efficient stream processing. See highlights from a recent conference
panel.

[**Ask the experts →**](/blog/future-of-the-modern-data-stack)  

## More insights

  * Three [architectural diagrams](https://future.a16z.com/emerging-architectures-modern-data-infrastructure/) (absolutely not simplified) for modern data infrastructure, from the folx and A16Z.
  * What’s your take on [Kappa Architecture vs. Lambda](https://www.kai-waehner.de/blog/2021/09/23/real-time-kappa-architecture-mainstream-replacing-batch-lambda/)? Here’s Confluent CTO Kai Wehner’s approach.
  * Explore the [Periodic Table of Realtime](https://ably.com/periodic-table-of-realtime) from Ably — an interactive way to learn about various players and protocols.
  * [Our team](/company) is growing, and it’s great! We welcomed frontend engineer Chris Gilchrist, head of technical content Kiersten Thamm, and community manager Theo England to the team.





